INTERVIEW TRANSCRIPT
Interviewer Name: Fiona Atukunda
Interview date: 4/11/2019
Name of respondent: Beatrice
H.H I. D: 4490131
Title status: Joint title
Interview start time: 11:48 am
Interview stop time: 1:37 pm
Age: 36
Marital status: Married
No. of children: 5
No. of people living in the household: 7
Occupation: Farmer
Second source of income: Sells chicken and bananas
Highest level of education: Primary 7
No. of years living in the village: 16
Roofing material: Iron sheets
Housing material: Mud, poles, battery lighting.
Interview Duration:

The interview happened in the respondent’s house. Their house is made of mud, poles, with battery lighting, they have iron sheets for the roofing. Asked about titling, she said that she didn’t know what a title meant so she was in doubt and told her husband that they will take their land through this title and he told her that titles are common, people buy them and since they were chosen they should accept to get it because its advantages would come later. She also told me that the husband buys land and signs by himself and she doesn’t sign with him except as a witness which she stopped doing because the land would still be in the man’s names alone therefore she has no share on the land except because she has children. When asked why she thinks that he buys land alone she said that it is a male ego of wanting to lead everything. They look to be middle class close to rich according the land they have and the things they do to get money for a village standard. She was welcoming, engaged and jolly. We had no interruptions at all.

She lives with her 4 children, the 5th one is in boarding school, and the husband comes after sometime since he was deployed at the police post in Rukungiri. He comes to visit after 2 or 3 months. She does little farming, sells bananas and chicken. They have 6 plots of land; the one they titled which is a half-acre of bare land, the one they are on which is 5 acres and more plus a banana plantation which is a half-acre that he received as inheritance from his father, 3 quarters of a banana plantation, a quarter acre of land, 1 and a quarter acre of land that he bought but she has no approved shares of because she always signs as a witness and not a buyer with her husband. She also inherited land at her home which is a quarter acre of land and the husband knows about it.


Warm up
It was good.
He comes after 2 or 3 months.
Like 2 days.
I haven’t yet done it because he hasn’t spent a long time away.
You see he studied in the police and his training has just ended and therefore he has just started work.
Yes.
I can’t go there; it will become hard. What will I go to do there, shifting?
I will stay here that is how I see it or I go there and visit or he comes here to visit.
They reach a time and ask for permission and he comes but it is not usual.
No, I didn’t dig I knew you were coming.
Yes, we are weeding and it is raining. But we have tried to lessen them.

The weeds can be there but now like for the millet, they are less so we are now working in the banana plantation.
Yes.
Yes, they have no issue.
Actually this one also has not gone to school, at their school they are doing primary leaving examinations.
Yes.
They have all gone to school. One is in secondary school in boarding then all the rest go to school and come back home.
We keep educating them.
No, I have stopped from here. I have made 5 of them. Don’t you see they are many?
We fear family planning and the injecta plan. We are told that family planning will kill us so that is why many women continue giving birth to many children.
We go there and get training but many fear saying that family planning can kill you and you leave your children behind.
You think they are there. We people make each other fear through these rumors.
I allowed and went on family planning.

Background information, Household structure and Land ownership
They are 5 boys
I kept trying to get pregnant so that I would a girl child but I failed and I stopped.
I found it at their home here. They have many boys.
No, no it can’t happen.
I was born in 1983
It is me and the children. The man comes in after some time.
He is just a relative of his and he had brought his phone here.
He is in senior 2.
In primary 7
I cultivate for seasons, I also work in the planation from where I sell the bananas and then I also rare chicken.
I do the local ones.
I sell them; I also sell local eggs.

I have 2. I had many but someone came and stole them.
I had made 7 chicks and their 2 hens. This place has thieves, they came in the night and broke into the kitchen and stole them.
Beans, I don’t do a lot of millet. I only plant little for eating. Then maybe also cutting bananas from the plantation and I sell them.
The work became much after him leaving, he told me that I should take care of his cows, the banana planation and things at home. After all this, the other farming failed me.
They are like 2 of them and their calf.
They are both cows.
I sell it.
It is a lot and millet has more work than other crops.
Millet is hard in weeding. Actually I put little there, then when he came he told me that I am not taking care of the plantation but I am planting this little millet. I know he is going to stop me from planting it next time.
We eat and get satisfied then I also sell them.
Like 3 bananas.

I got married here in 2002
I come from that side in Kibingo.
Yes, I do.
To check on my mother and my siblings.
They already have their families but they stay around there.
I take long now; I have even failed these days.
After 2 months, but these days, work is so much.
That has not happened because the money is little. I get them rarely but it is not for every day.
It is 5,000 shillings per shift and sometimes I can give them a bunch of bananas and they weed for me.
No I don’t have here but at my home I have it there.
It is a quarter acre of land.
Only us the girls got the same size of land.
Our father is the one who divided the land before he died.

Yes.
No I don’t have it. He just said and divided.
Everyone has like 3 quarters of an acre of land.
Yes, they got the same shares.
No, he can’t do it. We have bought much land but he can’t allow that we be on it together. I used to tell him at first but he refused. He makes the agreements in his names.
I would ask him but I didn’t understand him so I left him.
He doesn’t have an issue but he wants all things to be in his names because he is the family land. Sometimes I have fear but after I move on because the family head has decided so I leave it at that.
We are not yet wedded.
We are here.
It is big; it can make 5 acres or more altogether.
It is his inheritance from his father.
He had a lot of land, and he gave birth to my husband alone the other sibling of his died.

He gave birth to them two.
He had them, there are his older siblings from the first wife but after their father married his mother who was the young wife and she gave birth to only 3 of them. He has a sister who got married but he is the only boy so he stayed in the land.
It is there.
We have a banana plantation that side which is a half-acre, we have another plot of land which a 3 quarters of an acre of a banana plantation.
No that is also his inheritance from his father.
We bought it together.
No, there is no where I am on the agreements.
Yes, we have 1 acre and a quarter of land somewhere else.
It is just free land; we haven’t put anything there yet.
We will have grazed a cow and then sell it to buy a piece of land.
Yes, that is how I contribute to the land.
There is land that he has recently bought which is a quarter acre of land.

I cultivate on it.
Yes, he tells me.
He tells me to sign as a witness so I reached a time and I refused because I don’t sign as one who has bought with him.
I see that he has no issue and all that matters is if the children get their land.
No, I let go of everything and said that whatever he wants to do let him do it but he tells me about what he does.
There is another plot of land that is a half-acre of land where they planted the stones. It is bare land with nothing on it.
It is only us. We have another plot there in Kacucu, he didn’t talk about it when they came to visit us and they were writing the land we have. I asked him why he didn’t talk about it and he said that he had forgotten.
It is a plot with 4 rooms of shops thought they are not yet fully built.
It is just a plot of land with four rooms.
Where I told you that they titled, we were renting the land out to farmers but we stopped and in this season it is me who has cultivated it.

I have planted there sorghum, and it has some money here.
It picked up here and there is money in it.
Yes it does.
We sell like 24 kilograms at 15,000 shillings.
They go for 20,000.
No, sorghum is just easy to plant and weed and harvest. It doesn’t require much work.
Yes, it is easy because of that.
General land
When you buy, you make an agreement and the plant for you migorora where you stop.
I don’t think that it can happen unless if your father left for you an inheritance.
You can rent or someone gives you’re the land for free.
Someone can like it and help another person with land where they can cultivate and leave after harvesting. Otherwise you have to rent land and then pay and leave after the season is done.
We have just bought some of the land and the one the other side still has a youngness

about it and the other one we were renting it out.
When you plant crops there and they don’t yield. The person we bought the land from have over cultivated on it and so we are leaving it to grow a bush and regain its fertility.
It is rare to find it. That person may be a relative to you and they see that you don’t have where to dig or you don’t have land then he tells you to use their land and plan your sweet potatoes and after the harvest you leave their land.
That one stopped, you have to give money then you start cultivating.
They don’t have to ask anyone outside. He can just ask his family and tell them that he wants to sell this land.
I have hope that he will not go ahead and sell. Now like my husband, I haven’t seen this in him. He buys land but he has never sold land.
Yes, when he is buying he asks.
I think this one he can sell it.
He can’t sell it.
Yes, it is his inheritance so I may not do anything about it. I can refuse him and he asks me if it is my land. But I haven’t seen this with my husband. He doesn’t have the heart of selling.
I think it is land that we are using as a family. This is how I see it.

That one may fail because after they grow up you will have to give each child their own share but you can’t keep on digging on it together with them.
It is the family head with the authority over it.
I think I become the one who has authority on it.
It will remain with the children.
Us Banyankore when we start reaching the age we are in, we start writing a will saying that we have given so and so this part of the land and every other child you start writing about their share of land they will take when you are gone. This is what will help the children; when they are ending the funeral, the uncles will read for the children their parts.
No, we haven’t.
It means that it is my land that my father gave me.
Yes, he knows it.
I haven’t yet started using it, I gave it to my brother to be digging and cultivating on it.
No, he can’t because they gave it to us as girls so he doesn’t have an y link to it. We are 3 girls and the land they gave to us is on its own.

We have 6 boys.
Now I see it is both sides not my husband’s side alone.
Yes.
From home, my mother.
The boys had married and our last born has also married so he has land there. I think that if she dies, they will divide the land again and add us but little pieces.
It is like 3 acres of land.
Yes, they had not divided for our last born when out father died because he had not yet married.
I see that you as a woman can also rule it if you have the agreement of that land.
I would be having authority and control over it. Now like this man buys land then I also sign as one who has bought and then he wants to sell the land tomorrow; I can stop him from selling it and it can be heard. But no when I don’t have the signature, he can sell it since nothing can show that I am anywhere.
I see that it is a very good thing because you also trust that the land is yours. I also see it that way. If someone comes out and say they want to sell the land, they will sell it even though it should be sold.
It can also help my children in the next years when am not around if my signature is on the agreement. When am not around tomorrow, their father can decide to marry another woman and you find that he has taken all the land from the children and gives it to the other woman.

This can help when my signature is there, the children will say that he bought it with their mother and therefore they have a share on it.
Because the land that is there is small.
She will give us but you may not know also what she might decide but I have hope that she will give us.
Actually I also first feared about these titles you gave us. I feared that you might take our land. I asked the last man who came here called Steven and he said that the title doesn’t take our land. I told him I was scared because I wondered why they asked us about every land we have just like you have asked me. He said that there is no issue but we are lucky instead because they might pass a law that people need to have titles for their land. But I also first feared.
There is no other person that fears.
Yes, but also unless you have bordered a church. My husband’s father had bordered land with a church and they stole much land from him but he left it. This was long time ago; his father’s land was next to the church so they stole his land but he didn’t report them but they later got a title.
Yes, they made a title for their land. But this was long ago. Otherwise if you don’t have your land next to a church then no one can take your land.
I don’t know but I think maybe they want to keep adding on their land so that it can be much.
We made our land farm land and fenced it with oruyenje (a milky tree plant used to portion and fence farms).

I think this was long time ago and now the world has changed.
It is buying it with money.
No, it is only through buying.
Here on this land.
No, I found him here because he got it from his father.
Maybe the children but there is nothing.
Yes, sometimes it is better.
There is coffee and a farm for razing and the banana plantation down there.
We pick it and get money.
Now that he has been away, it has been mine as a woman. When he was still living here full time, it would be his as a man.
When he was around, we had one bag but now, everyone has theirs.
Yes, he does. He doesn’t have an issue in this, we tell each other.
Baseline awareness of titles

I haven’t understood it very well.
I see that it helps protect the land.
If they want to steal it, they can’t. Let us say that my husband is not around tomorrow, someone can remove the mugorora but if there are stones then it is much better. That is how I see it.
When they gave me this title, I kept it. The man who gave it to me told me to keep it very far so that my husband finds it here because he had gone. The man told me to take a picture with my in-law, so I got my husband’s cousin and we took a picture. I don’t know if this had any issue or not. They took the picture when we were getting the title.
So when he gave it to me, I kept it and I don’t know how it will help me.
l think it can help me when I want some money so I can take it there and I get a loan.
We don’t use loans maybe in these small groups in the village.
No, for them you just write a document where they make you sign and then you get the money and go home.
Yes, and when the time reaches, you look for the money and take it back.
No, we get little money like 100,000 or 200,000 shillings.

I think they still make them sign and not take their title there.
I haven’t yet seen what I like about it because they gave me the title and I got it and kept in the house. I ask myself what it is for, I haven’t yet known, he told me to keep the title very well so I also kept it well as I was told.
They were telling us but they didn’t tell us the real reason as to why.
No, maybe I asked the man who gave us the title how it would be helpful to us. So he told me that I can go to the bank and get a loan and that is the only way it will help us.
I was asking myself why they have to ask about every land and I said that will they reach a time and bring refugees to our land and they tell us to leave. That is what I had feared.
No but this is how is thought because you kept asking us about every land and you wrote it done. When I asked Steven, he told me that there is no issue.
I think there may be no difference. Now you see the agreement, someone can sell to you land and say that me so and so I have sold land to this person at 100,000 shillings and you keep the agreement. I think there is a difference now.
You see when I buy land here, they put for me a mugorora showing where I pass and stop. But the title, it doesn’t show that. It has stones to mark one plot of land yet the agreement can show many plots of land.
Yes, they do but you see a time reaches and the stones get uprooted or people come and remove them.

Yes, I found it down there near the church, I saw the stone thrown on the side.
You see they told us that we have to be on the title the both of us or else we won’t get it.
Yes, we would be together but you see for this time, he came and said that you would come and talk to the both of us and my husband wasn’t around so he said that it wouldn’t be possible to speak to one. He called my husband to come and we be here both.
Yes, they love it.
I think if he wants to use this land, he first talks to me or if he wants to go and get a loan he first asks me and we know what it is going to be used for.
I don’t know think they are there.
Yes, I loved it.
Maybe to go and get money and for us to get that money; we add on our farmland and make it bigger it can help me that way.
I see it that it is like an agreement whereby if someone wants to take my land, I can pass through you people to help me.
They are there but if we fail to agree from there then you people can help us.
When they gave us this title, there is a man who came and told my husband that if it was for him, he wouldn’t put me there. He said that he can’t put the wife on the title because she didn’t buy the land for him. I also told him that if he doesn’t want to put the wife there then they

won’t give him the title. He told me that he would rather leave the title than add her because she didn’t carry land from her home to bring it to his home. This is how men are saying that they can’t allow to have women be with them on a land title, they would rather refuse to get it.
It is the ego of men wanting to be the leader of everything.
Yes, like when he wants to marry another woman he can refuse to add you there.
If you don’t respect him and you want to rule him. Like I told that I would want to put my signature on the land with my husband and he refused so I would leave it meaning that there is peace. If you keep on it then you will fight and that to them is dishonor.
I would not hear this.
I would hear them there. I asked one man how he got his title and told me that he bought it.
I didn’t investigate him well but he told me that he titled his land in Kagera and bought the title. He said that the way his land was big he didn’t think they would consider him to get a free title. I told him that I see them putting the stones on land that is together and he told me that his land is big so they would never give him a free title. He didn’t continue to talk to me because it was late.
There where you have come from.
There in Kampala but I don’t know whom they reach to.
I think you start from the chairman LC 1 and he makes for you a writing then you pass by the sub county.

They think that these titles help you get money, that if you have it you can’t struggle getting money from the bank. When you go to get the money, you don’t even go into lines but you get the money quickly.
No I haven’t, there are people also who don’t like them.
I think it is our foolishness to wonder what a title is and think that it is for taking away our land. To be very ignorant about something.
Intra household discussion and Bargaining
I told him that this title won’t they take our land with it and he told me that I should stop being foolish and he said that people get titles every day and others buy them. He said that since they have chosen us to get the title for free why would I refuse it. I told him okay then I asked him what good things are in the title and then he told me that we shall see the good things later. I really didn’t know what a title meant.
There is a man up there whom I asked about it, and he said that the title keeps the land and it is good. He said that he also wanted the title though he wasn’t picked. He said that even when the government decides to do something on your land and it is titled, they can give you money but when you are going to sell it you also give the buyer the title also. But apart from selling, you can keep your title.
Yes, I kept on understanding it better.
Yes.
It is me who asked him what they were talking about and he didn’t tell me anything.
He didn’t ask me so we both left it at that.

He was still here.
We didn’t talk about anything, the planted the stones and left. I only asked him if the stones were the title and he told me to keep on waiting. They brought the title when he wasn’t around.
He was in training do I didn’t call him.
He came and found it here from the training. I showed it to him and kept it.
He just told me to give it to him to keep it and he kept it then left.
Yes.
Nothing has changed.
It has given me respect.
They would call him to come and they talk to us and he wouldn’t refuse to come or be there with me. So I saw that he loved it and I loved it too.
It hasn’t been bad. I don’t see that we are badly off.
I have stayed here because we agree with each other.
I think it is also God. When he tells me to do something I do it and if he tells me to do it then I refuse he might beat me and I go home. Like how he has been telling me to leave millet and working in the plantation,

if he comes and finds me still in the millet he can send me away and then he married another woman. This is what I mean by agreement.
Yes, it happened once.
It was in 20111.
For this one, he was staying somewhere in Kacucu, he had bought for me a cow which was a bit sickly and it was here in the farm. During Christmas time the cow disappeared, but it was sick. I looked for the cow and I failed to find it so I called him on phone and told him that the cow is lost. He came with all anger and wanted to beat me so I got my way and left. When I was there I heard that they found it somewhere in water dead. This is what had taken me back home.
Like 2 weeks.
No, he sent a child because he feared.
No, we didn’t talk about it.
No it didn’t end, he sent the child to come and tell me that the cow was found although it was dead. But we didn’t sit and talk about anything.
I kept quiet, I didn’t even go to see where it had died from. I think am the one who had the mistake because I looked for the cow and I wouldn’t find it and someone has left you with a cow and now it can’t be found. So I decided to go home and keep peace so that nothing bad can come out of that.
We sit and discuss.
Now that he is there, he can send money to our son who is in school. Other times when he

has left the cows, he tells me to sell some milk and buy books for the children and then he also tells us to drink the rest.
I think we are not the same. You may find that your husband buys for you a dress but mine doesn’t buy it for me but he tells me to work in his land and buy it for myself. He can give me this cow and he tells me to sell milk and buy my dress but there are women for whom they bring the dress to. So we are not the same.
These ones are there and you find that the woman does everything like paying school fees and buying the food.
It is like when he leaves his cow here, if he finds that I have taken care of it, I think it encourages him a lot. Even if he doesn’t find me with any garden but when I have given the cow water, it encourages him a lot.
He loves them a lot.
Maybe like washing for him his shirts and I put them there.
I think somehow it is the same but it also depends on how the man treats you.
If the man doesn’t give you salt, paraffin, do you think you can wash for him his shirt while you are happy. You might leave it and then everyone washes for himself. I have seen this out there.
Yes, I will also stop washing for him then he will wash for himself. I be seeing it there, the man makes money then he goes to the bar and drinks alcohol in it and it gets finished and they even fail to get what to eat.
It is the man.

Yes, we do.
We go with the one he has chosen.
We bought land recently that side down and were adding it to the farm it is close to a quarter acre of land. I called him to tell him that the man was selling so he told me to sell some cow we had and I paid for it. He also gave me his friend with who we went with and paid for the land and left.
It was 600,000 shillings.
Now on this one it is me who signed because he wasn’t around. When he came I showed him the agreement and I saw that he didn’t mind about it and he told me to keep it. He doesn’t mind much but he wants that all control remains for the man so that the woman doesn’t disrespect
Yes
There are 2 left.
We bought one at 6 million, where we out the title was 600,000 shillings and the rest are in between here.
We work for that money here; we would pick coffee and sell it to buy a cow and when we get a land deal, we sell the cow and then buy land.
It is a quarter acre
We get like 750 kilograms.

We normally sell the fresh one from the garden but there are sometimes when we would dry and take it to the mill.
No, in many places that is not how it is. Many men say that you can’t trust a woman’s wisdom because it can throw you far away so if you are a man you should do things alone and not include a woman at all.
General norms around land
There are some who have bought but they were chased away their men. There are 2 women here who were chased their men. There are men who are adulterous and like one of these that am telling you about chased away the man he now rents in the centre. She chased him away from the land so he left her with the children and left. This is not common though but there are some who also have shares from their parents.
Many don’t know about the land; she hides the land from him.
The men know about it. When your mother has passed on and your husband follows you for burial he knows what is coming next. They know that you will get land from home.
Yes, he knows about it.
Yes, they are there.
It wouldn’t make me happy.
You have a man and he has land here then I also have land there, I don’t think you can have peace in the home. You have children together why would you be separating land.

No, this is inherited. You are now together and have bought land then you are separating it maybe if the man wants to change his mind sometime later but I think if I go to the government they will help me.
I will go to the chairman LC 1 he can help me if the man is selling the land to finish it yet we have children. What will the children get, in this case the government can help me even divide the land and he takes his share then I remain with my share.
I don’t want it.
When we have land together then there is no issue, when he wants to sell he can ask us and we will have seen the reason as to why he wants to sell. If that land remains for me and him it even has respect and people can’t disrespect you, they will be knowing that the land belongs to that man.
You see we women are not the same. There is a woman who is a teacher and they give her a salary so foe her she may want land but she will hide it from her husband and when the husband finds this out it also becomes a war because men don’t like this.
Many women have the land with their husbands, those who have it alone are few. In the village they say that the women who have land alone are ruling their husbands.
The man is the one who decides on this.
No, it may not relate.
To find that I own land and the man too owns land and then this helps us in the home.
It may help us even though I grow crops on my land it helps us together.

Yes, it can happen and they have them. I may also have it.
Now that we have land with the man, and he is the one to die before me, wont I then stay with the land if the children haven’t yet grown up. Like that.
My husband normally asks me when he is going to buy land and where he is going to buy it from.
Because we have lived here together and he can’t just do it from there in hiding.
Yes, she can stay.
There is no difference. When a man dies and you had agreement between you two then you can stay there whether it is his inheritance or you bought it together. You can also divide for you children if he died abruptly like an accident and he left no will behind.
They might tell her to go away and leave the land.
But even when a woman doesn’t give birth, your find that the man gave birth to children out there and he will write and say that even though his wife didn’t give birth, they should leave her with some land which will bury her. If he gave birth to children outside, he will divide most of his land among them.
And I haven’t given birth.
I can stay there.

No, they won’t.
It will now be for the children.
They will remain there like that.
If they get someone well and good but if they don’t get any one, the orphan always grows.
The in-laws where she got married to are the ones who will decide on this, whether they give it to their children they will be the ones to decide.
Yes, when they are young they go and get married or they get their men who come and marry them on that land.
Yes it is there.
Yes, the woman will have become tough and her in-laws can’t even reach her at all so she makes her own decisions and they just leave her alone.
She can bring the man there in the children. There is a man who died here and he was young so the children were young too. So the woman kept bringing the man to sleep there but when the children are old then it becomes hard.
No, they even separated because he was still a young man. He left her there.
I wouldn’t want to add another man.

I think they get natural problems like we were created and then she desires to get married again.
I think that it is just nature that we were created for a man to live with a woman but I think there is nothing else. No, what will the man help you with, there is nothing he might just eat away your property and it gets done.
I think they see into this thing of the other man may come and spoil the family so she decides to take care of the children.
No, I haven’t seen it here.
Yes.
From what it was in the past.
There is something that has changed. In the past, they would say that they can take the land away from the widow let us say that she hasn’t given birth; they would take away the land from her. But these days you can stay on your land and no one can touch it, not even your in-laws.
You see when you would lose your husband, they would say that come what may, your in law would marry you but these days it is you who decides whether to get married or not.
He would leave his brother whom he would say would marry you and he was to take care of the deceased’s family now. This changed these days, it is no longer there.
It think there is understanding these days and every one decides for themselves. This is how I see it.

They would decide for you; whatever they tell you is what you would allow to go with.
I think they also know that they should not be taking land away from the widows because if they report him then it will be their loss. Widows are to go slow on. You see that she lost her husband and she is trying to raise the children then you come to take away her land. Even the government has helped.
You take land away from me, won’t I report you. I will report him that he is taking away my land and does being a widow mean that my land should now be taken away. We go through this and he leaves me alone.
Your husband passing away is not a good thing but you see it is God who decides.
You just look at the widow and let her be. There is nothing we can do to her because she can be in her house.
No, we don’t do anything for her. Everyone stays in their home. Once in while she can ask a man out there to help her roof her kitchen but there is nothing I can do.
They normally divide the land and share.
There is one who will go away and go back to her home and they separate for good like that. But if you don’t like it, you can go to report him to the LC 1 and they divide the land.
Yes, she can get.
No, maybe the one I had told you that chased the man away. But the man came back and they gave him some of the land and he uses it though the woman stayed on the bigger land and the man took small land.

The woman remained with them.
She has the right to remain with her children.
The man will leave you on the land and go elsewhere and sometimes he married another woman there.
It is not common here finding that a woman has left the land, the man will be the one to leave if you disturb him or he goes but comes back at some time later.
No, if you have gone home then you have gone forever. If I don’t go away with the children that means I will say bye to the land forever.
If I go with the children, I have to come back and he gives me the land because where do they want me to put the children. This is when they cut for me a share and tell me to be there with the children then he remains on his share.
Yes.
If you don’t mind they will not divide the land but if you are a woman who says you will go and report him because you have nowhere to out the children, you will get the land. If you separate and you decide to go back to your home, that means your will stay there unless you stick on it and follow up through the authorities or even in prison. This is when you get land. But if they chase you away as a woman and you also go away, you forget about the land.
I leave them and I go back home.
R: I allow and we separate like that.

Yes.
What will I be reporting him for, I just go like that.
He doesn’t live far from there, he comes and digs on his share and then after goes to his home but the woman remained there.
They don’t make me happy, when you separate and the woman has the children, she may fail to take care of them and she can’t put them through school and she starts digging to make ends meet. If you agree and work with the man, the child can’t fail to go through school. This is what I don’t like about this. I would love to keep in agreement but when someone refuses you let them go.
No
They start calling them the stubborn ones that the men left them because of their stubbornness.
I would want them to stay together but you see sometimes this fails.
If she has separated with her husband and she wasn’t stubborn they call her stubborn. They say that what made her separate with her husband is stubbornness. The woman is not honored, at times she has no fault. Maybe when you have lost your husband, that is when they see you to be okay.
If someone has separated with their husband, people should just look at her and let her be. They shouldn’t over follow her around, because there is a reason as you why they separate and sometimes you can tell the man that you get back together and he refuses. So me when I see you, I let you be as you are.

No, when it is the man’s fault, he can’t leave the house unless if it for the woman and he refuses to let go or leave, then the man can run away and leave her there.
No, if the woman doesn’t go there first to report the man can’t.
Me I see that he wants to marry another woman sometime later. I see this.
I think that he trusts her that much most of the time.
The biggest thing is being truthful, if he does everything in truth and you don’t lie to him most of the time. When he leaves his money there, you don’t take it away, things like these.
We might have disagreements because why would he refuse if they wanted us to be there together. That means that he is up to something and then we fight in the home.
I don’t see any problem unless if it comes later.
There will be no misunderstandings, where will they come from.
No, it may not end them now that we have land together, why wouldn’t we agree from the start.
Unless we agree as people but now that we have land together it can’t end the misunderstandings we have.

You can know what will happen ahead but I trust that there will no conflict because of land. The only problem is that you can never know where you are going and our hearts might change. But in my view, I don’t see any problem there.
Land disputes
I think it is selling without agreeing. Because behind this side, there is a man who sold land and his family didn’t agree to it, he had two wives so he was going to sell for the older wife and the wife ran and told the buyer not to buy that if her husband comes to him, he should tell him that he has no money. The man came to know about this and he wanted to kill the woman asking her if she is the one who gave him that land and it was his inheritance so the woman gave up and let him sell the land.
She just left it. The man received this land from his father so the woman had no way to interfere with the land. The man would come and sell the land and then leave. So you never know we might reach here, but we haven’t seen it yet.
Maybe if I sell to someone land, now up there my husband bought something small on the road and that person kept extending the boundaries of the plot entering our land there where we have rooms.
I went there and asked this person and instead he abused me. When I called my husband to tell him, he told me to leave him because he is coming so that they go and talk.
You use the help of the LC 1 chairman and you understand each other then you settle.
Yes, the family and the village people can go there together and they see it and reconcile them without even going to the chairman.
Yes, me the buyer and the seller.

Yes, but you can call other two people from outside and they help you discuss and finish but if you fail then you go and report higher.
It is disagreement, this is when you leave and separate with your spouse and you go away for a while. When you are there, he will decide to sell the land so that he punishes you. That is the main aim because he separated with your when you had not agreed.
I don’t know this one, I should be asking you.
I think it can but passing very far like where you have come from but not the title passing through the LC 1.
I don’t understand the title well so it is you who was supposed to tell me about this. Actually he even has the stones there.
Yes.
No, they put in his but he keeps digging into our land.
The government should help them because when you call the chairman, you resolve the issue the way it is and it is rare to find people moving beyond this. They explain to you and if you go ahead they arrest you.
You see I first called my husband and he told me to leave it so that he comes and they sort themselves.

Yes.
From Kampala in an organization that does land titles and all that you have been teaching us about the land titles. I don’t know whether it is true.
The question I wanted to ask you is that you are supposed to be the one telling me about some questions that you were asking me like what the use of the title was. I have just received the title and I don’t understand it.
Maybe but you see that I don’t live with him here.
Now, if I am there and now that you have given us the title, if I die and my husband also dies, can these children keep this title or they will fail? Now how can they keep it, can’t someone come and steal it from them?
And what if someone comes and steals if rom me now that my husband doesn’t live here, what will I do. The person who gave it to me told me to keep it very well because someone can steal it from me and I will never get it again.
So he can also fail to use it?
Thank you.
