INTERVIEW TRANSCRIPT
Interviewer Name: Fiona Atukunda
Interview date: 08/10/2019
Name of respondent: Phoebi
H.H I. D: 4190591
Title status: Solo title
Interview start time: 9:21 am
Interview stop time: 11:06 am
Age: 45
Marital status: Married
No. of children: 6
No. of people living in the household: 9
Occupation: Farmer
Second source of income: Selling goats and piglets
Highest level of education: Primary 6
No. of years living in the village: 8
Roofing material: Iron sheets
Housing material: Bricks, cement and solar
Interview Duration:

The interview happened outside the respondent’s house on a verandah. We had no interruptions whatsoever. She had just returned to her home that morning as she was coming from her home in Ntungamo where she was being treated on her leg that was sick for a while. She welcomed us and we were served tea later. Their house is made of cement, bricks and they have solar lighting. Asked about the title, she told me that they were given a condition of deciding which one of the two would appear on the title and she said being a woman, you have to respect your man in certain things so they put the husband’s name on the title which she is happy with. Something I found interesting about their land is that where they are now was given to them in exchange for their plot where they were before by a rich neighbor who wanted to extend his land. He gave them a choice to look for whatever amount of land at whatever price and he will pay for it to have them move. The details are explained later in the interview, but for their close to an acre piece of land they had before, they got this 6-acre piece of land and two other side plots that this rich man bought for them and they moved. He also bought the man’s mother and brother who are their neighbor in this village where they are now.
Given their land size, the activities they do to earn a living, the cows they have and their home picture, they are middle class status. She lives with her husband and their 6 children plus one other child whom she got from her elder sister to help her take care of him and lessen her burden of the children. They have 4 plots of land, 3 of which the rich man bought for them and 1 that she said they worked together and bought with her husband.  She was engaged in the interview, conversant but looks to be sad about their first born daughter who has never talked since birth but she hears and walks and does things as she likes but has never been to school nor does she help her at all with home chores. She said they have moved through many hospitals and spent much money but they told them that she is fine. I think she is settled in her family but doesn’t sound like she has friends and a support system in the village because she told me the doctor who was treating her leg said that she must have stepped on witchcraft medicine so she said she doesn’t trust people around in the village.

Warm up
I was in Ruhaama in Ntungamo (a neighboring district to Mbarara)
That is very far
It has been a year and some months, I first thought it was just a swelling on this big toe nail. They told me I jumped some witchcraft medicine so I went and looked for someone to remove it. They have been cutting me and treating me until now.
You can’t know when you are walking around. I don’t know if it was for me or not for me.
Around June to July there that is how I have been suffering with it.
It has really been bad; you would not want to see it. I would spend the whole day covering it but now I am well.
Yes, I now walk well with no problem. Before I would bathe the whole body but not touch there, now I am able to touch and feel no pain at all.
People in the village are like that, you can’t know who is having hatred or a grudge with who and when they do such things you find that you are the first to pass and the medicine catches you.
It ended well
The ones I have found are good and the ones that have gone to school must also be fine.

He failed to go to school, I don’t know what entered him he refused to go to school and even swore never to go and he left it.
Yes, I took him to a vocational school to do something there, after 1 year, the school collapsed. I think the director took a loan so he closed the school and left the children there then he left. And now I am still looking for money so that he can go elsewhere but I have spent much money on this leg, Ntungamo is very far now when you add the money for the medication and the one I pay the doctor it is a lot.
I have hope that he will go back to school. I will look for him another place.
He is well, I found him with no issue
For example, in the last season, I did not at all because of the leg but I used other people to plant for me.
I pay them, the world changed, no one can dig for you for free. For those who want money I give them, for those who take bananas I also give them as I also go forward like others.
I am now very well, I was told to come back after the doctor was sure that I am fine, he told me that if I feel any pain then I can go back but he saw that I was fine.
Background, household structure and information
We have 6 children and one relative we look after he is a child still in primary. in total we are 9. This boy we help has his parents and they live there in Isingiro (another neighboring district to Mbarara). They suffered hunger and too much dry season, so we took the child away from them and we pay for him school fees take care of him. He is our child we have spent 3 years with him.
It is a job if I see that the mother has never given him a book or anything and she has never come to see him. He is now my job that I have done.

I am born with the mother so I am his aunty.
She has children but they don’t have any help to care for them. They went through a very bad season of dryness and their banana plantations were uprooted so I decided to help her by the hand.
One has already gone to secondary school in senior one in Bushenyi in boarding, the other one is in primary 6 up there in boarding school also, then one is in primary five and the last one is the young girl I gave birth to in my old age she is 2 years and in nursery school.
The boys are 2 and the girls are 4
I am in 45 years
I am a farmer I dig.
Beans and millet. If I am to sell, I sell the beans, if I have harvested 100 kilograms I sell like 50 kilograms and I stay with the other half for us to eat.
I don’t see it but I have a project of goats and I also have one pig which after giving birth to piglets, I sell them then I stay with their mother.
I only have the female one, I have to first look for the male because I don’t have it. I go and ask whoever has then I bring it here for mating then I take it back, mine doesn’t move.
Yes
I sell them.

We have cows that they are for giving us milk for the children. They are 6 or 7.
When they have given birth we sell but after weaning the calves we get ours and other times the milk is nowhere to be seen.
We have too much sunshine here.
No, it is much better.
I stopped in primary 6, it is like I never went to primary.
Things of parents of those days you know them. They would tell you that there is no money, stop there and sit at home as you look for something else to do. When I didn’t find what to do, I went to start a family.
For this, I am trying as a parent. This is the boy I told you about that we are taking care of, he has been sent back but there is not even 100 shillings in the house. (Respondent’s son comes back home from school after being sent back for school fees).
If you haven’t got money yet they can in normal clothes.
No, we work for ourselves.
8 years’ now.
We were near Mbarara in Kafunjo.

That is where I found my husband I think they were born there. I had spent there about 20 to 21 years.
She is in her 21st year but she has problems in her head. She never spoke from birth; here is nothing she can differentiate.
We have her here.
We started walking to the hospitals after birth until she was above 10 years old then we left her. We sold our cows, spent a lot of money and we were close to staying with nothing.
We didn’t know the disease, when you go to the hospital and they tell you that the child has no sickness from her day up to her age that I told you of, they said she has no sickness. The good thing she is not lame that she can’t walk and she knows how to eat by herself and wash her clothes.
If I don’t tell her to do this, she can’t do it. You found me preparing the house, if I don’t tell her to sweep the house, she will not sweep it. She can hear very well, even when you are calling other people, she will be the first to answer and come. Her growth became stunted; I don’t know if sometimes she does things unwillingly.
We even took her to school, the brother went to senior one but she was still in primary one, she never proceeded to another class. She would escape from her teachers and go outside, so we saw paying money yet she isn’t studying and we left her. I can’t lie that she can get a hoe and dig for me, no. if she like, she will fetch water and that is it. When I leave the garden, I have to come back and cook which I have been doing for her for now 21 years.
Yes.
We had less income there.
It was very small.

Like close to half an acre, we were giving birth, we didn’t have enough plantation to get bananas from and we didn’t have land on which to cultivate. We got a chance and got a rich man.
The plantation was there but it was small. We got a rich man who wanted to enlarge his farm and he exchanged our land there for this one.
He had a farm next to us, his cows would come and eat our plantations and all the gardens we would have there. So he said that instead of us having these cow issues, let me look for you a better plot of land or you can walk around and where you find it I will pay. So we found this one.
No, but I know him from our home in Ntungamo, he is a friend to our family.
No, he found us there and he started buying off people and we also found that he bought us. Our land was really small and it wasn’t enough for us. We even came here with my mother in law.
Yes, we were next to her like here and there. We brought her too.
She has her own land too
May be this one that you gave us.
Yes, I go back.
I go to see my surviving parent my mother. I can be here and I get a desire to go see her, my father died, it is now past 5 years. I have my brother there and my mother,

He has his own family near there. We have only one boy and we are 5 girls.
If not for this leg that has been disturbing me, a year can end without me going there. It is always in between 1 to 1 and a half year then I go.
It takes me about 1 hour and a little more by a motorcycle though I pay more money than a car.
Between 20,000 to 25,000 shillings and for the car I use about 15,000 to 18,000 shillings only and this only to go there.
I don’t have any land as a woman. Whatever we have with my husband is all I have.
No.
No, when our father was about to die, he had two wives so he divided for his two wives and told them that each woman should divide and give their son or child land. My brother was given his share and you know how us girls our share is with our mother and she is alive so we can’t get her out of the house yet she is still alive. Until she is not there, that is when we will get our shares.
He has land.
He has 4 now but he had 8 and I think he got a desire to buy a car so he sold and bought a lorry that he uses for transport work.
She has 2 acres and something a little more I think.
Yes, and the other woman had 5 boys and 4 girls while our mother had 1 boy and 5 girls. If she is to divide for us she will divide for us her 6 children. Girls can’t be given land when their mother is still alive. You can’t take the place where she is getting from a banana to sell.

Our father divided for the wives and put it into writing and he told us that no one should ever try to disturb the other and that every woman should take care of her own family. After my father died, the will got lost but us we stayed as one family. We all love each other as one you can’t know that these are for our stepmother. Unless this changes later, it hasn’t happened yet for now.
Yes
This one and other small ones
I think it can reach 6 acres
We share boarder our farm with someone up there then next to our mother in law and this compound then up at the banana plantation.
We made an agreement with the man I told you bought for us and the seller.
Yes, I did, we did the agreement at the lawyer’s place in Mbarara, his name is Magoba.
He came and got it for us the owner of this place after being paid, shifted to Bukanga.
Yes, we did with the lawyers and finished. He put his signature, we out ours and he gave the land then he went his way.
100 million shillings

Yes
He didn’t give us hard cash, but we were rating it at 50 to 70 million shillings. He told us that he couldn’t keep taking care of the cows but we would agree and whatever land we loved, he would buy it. He gave the land owner a cheque and he went to the bank and got his money and left. It was a blessing.
Yes, it is a big blessing
It reaches to about 3 acres
There are two other plots that he bought for us on top of this one. They are close to half an acre and we bought for ourselves the third one which is also half an acre.
The two were bought together with this one. The man just asked how much the owner wanted in all the 3 plots and he paid. The other one is what we bought with our money.
About 3 million shillings.
Yes, and I put my signatures on all agreements.
Yes, I do grow crops there. When I sell my goat, I send them money to get me works and they cultivate on my behalf since I am not paying rent money for the land. Here I pay 80,000 and rent land for a season, so they both help me on contributing to my family’s wellbeing.
There is no one else but us
That place you see over there like a compound is where I dig but otherwise it is small therefore I rent and cultivate on other people’s land.

General land
People here buy and others got shares from their parents but they sell to get a better piece of land that they like.
We have cattle farmers but also there are those who do cultivation. All of these are done here.
Yes, that is what I told you about. If you have your money, whether you want a farm to graze, you find someone with a farm but has no cows you pay him for a whole year or for 6 months and after your time you leave or add him more money for more time. If you want to cultivate, you also look for land and pay and this is how we survive.
Yes, I think what brings about this is educating children and we have a problem of dryness so we would be growing more crops but the banana plantations for example dry up and you don’t get out any money.
I rent half an acre most of the time and I grow on beans and millet most of the time.
This is not possible even if it is your friend’s land, you have to give them money here. Things for free are not here. You can give them someone money at the start and when the season ends, you pay the balance.
You first understand each other and agree as a family more so for husband and wife, then ask some friends if they know anyone willing to buy or if it is buying you ask them if there is any one they know selling.
It is not possible because you first have to agree with your wife before you sell. If you don’t agree, it is not possible, if it is the land where she is right now, how will you remove her to take her where exactly.

This is like stealing land, it might be known that he stole it.
His friends, he can call his friend and ask him what he thinks such a piece of land is worth.
Whether I go to town, no one can have control over my land. That land remains his even if he is not there.
I haven’t heard about or seen it.
He can look for a worker and puts him there or get his friend to help him take care of it but he can’t just leave it here.
This person can reach out to the person who the land owner left to take care of it and this caretaker asks the land owner if he accepts then that is it, if he refuses then the person leaves the land.
It is land for us as a family I think.
Like you know us the banyankore (tribe in Mbarara), we get omugorora and put one here and the other there. We all know who we boarder our land with as a family.
The one who wants to cultivate can do so, or graze but no one can else without us the parents and owners.
Yes, like my husband and me his wife.

We leave it to our children.
It depends, you can decide that they still all use it as one with none having a share or you divide for them and everyone knows where their share is and after dividing it is no longer family land therefore someone can decide for themselves whether they would love to sell it or not.
In a good way, you would out it into a title and it stays there for many generations. Even us were not able to get it because we didn’t have money but now we have it.
If you get it from the lawyer and put it at the chairman’s, do you think someone can just come to buy here, even if he attempts in the children one of them will be wise and tell the buyer that this land is in a title and he will go away.
I think they have a way they also do it, but if you haven’t divided for any child telling them that you can only dig form here to there, they all can use the land and none can sell because none has a share of their own.
Maybe that one they exchanged for us to get this one. Me and my husband, our children were still young so we agree the two of us.
My husband’s elder brother remained there. Everyone has their heart’s desire, you may find that where he was, it was enough for him and his family but for us, ours was not enough.
In truth, there was no equal sharing, the older brother stayed indeed the older one.
On this one, he is the first born and these ones are the younger ones, you know how people of old used to give birth to many children 9 to 10 of them. When their father passed on because he was old, he was wise and started planting bananas adding to himself, so no one could take away his plantation and give it to another one. Wherever this banana plantation reached, they gave him that land. They got the same share on farm but they didn’t get the same on the banana plantations.

This is when I tell you what you did that makes it mine. You put in stones and gave us a title so I know that it is my land and no one can touch it.
Someone can go in hiding and cut it off and sell it but now the hope I have is that he can’t do it.
I am the only one truly.
If he wants to marry another woman you can’t stop him or if he wants to give her and her children the land you can’t refuse because it is titled. He has to get off some land to put his wife and other family. There is nothing you can do; will you wait to be murdered as you see.
As a woman, you have to put your mind and take care of things you have with your husband, you find men drinking alcohol and they are not stable but if you have put your hand on a title, he can’t sell. You can also stand and stop someone else from buying it or you report them. But if a lady you keep quiet, he will go and sell and after the money is done he comes back for another part.
I said that the person who sold us this land gave us an agreement.
It is a good thing because if she is on the title, no one in their right mind can come to buy that land without the wife’s approval. But if your names are not there, you will just find it finished.
If I see that the land is there whole, I plant, eat and drink then I also be satisfied as a person
I haven’t seen any as a woman that may be we fight, him saying he wants to sell and I say you will not sell it.
I can’t think about it right now because I don’t know about it. My mother is still alive,

Before she leaves, I can’t inherit it. And you never know, what if I die before her? I don’t know this.
If the man is still alive, both of us take care of it, and if he is no longer alive then I also take care of it, if I am not then he also takes care of it to the best of our ability.
They be there but in this village we don’t have any issue with a stone or omugorora, I haven’t heard of any one quarreling with their neighbor about land.
No, just that you may not know what will happen in the future you can only say what you have seen.
I think when I get money, I look for it and buy it and if I don’t get it I stay with what we have and rent the other land for growing crops.
They are all banana plantations.
I think that it is this one.
We will know this I think in the future because we haven’t had any children that are in need of getting shares.
Yes
No, may be that small part like a compound that I told you I dig on.
Yes

Baseline awareness of titles
This is one family, there was another person there but we removed him and brought our own relative who has that banana plantation that is going down. You never know relatives may want to use this person to take land from us but now that we have a title, I think this can’t be done.
They are very good people but that is what I told you that you can know what happens today but you can’t know what will come tomorrow. But I think they have no issue to even start thinking about such a thing.
I have loved it, there is no disturbance we can get on our land extending our boundaries.
No I don’t have any
In an agreement, they can pull a mugorora from there and they put it here, but for a title the good thing is that where the stone was planted that is where it will stay. No one can go beyond it to uproot it and put it there.
Agreements are us people, one of the witnesses can take their friend out and makes them happy and tomorrow they will start saying that their boundary was passing here but now that there is a title, where the stone passes there is no changing it for years and years.
They used to talk to the both of us and they told us that we are now going to give you a title, they came and first planted the stones and after they brought the title.
They put only for the man. They asked us to use only one person’s name, as a woman you can’t now be greater than the man, you go back down a little bit. Wherever he is not, people know that he is my husband and I can be there.
I feel happy in this because I haven’t experienced any problems in it. Nothing has changed yet.

We know that he who has the title is the one with the land so we saw that we couldn’t keep it in this house and we took it to the bank and kept it there.
You fight as a woman but if you fail you let it be. You can’t chase them away.
I think that and I have hope that he can’t sell it because I haven’t seen it in him yet that he wants to sell.
Yes, it is good because you are one and you have given birth to children together. Also they love it incase tomorrow he changes himself on her and wants to sell the land or these loans that are very common, you find that he has got one that you don’t know about.
Yes, they can.
People’s hearts are not the same, I can be seeing him and he sees me but we don’t know what each other is thinking about. Since he has not done it before in the years we have spent together, I hope he will be faithful to me.
I love it but since they asked us to pick one of us two, so here as a woman you have to go slowly, so I said they should put the man.
No, we were sitting there together just like we are here the two of us. We all accepted to do the same thing.
Honesty will come through, you can’t find him saying he sells here and I tell him not to. Whatever we decide to do together is what we will do.
I think knowing that the land is for both of us and tomorrow no one can turn on the other meaning even for our children they will be one with none wanting to sell here and there.

The way we do things is different, you may find that a man wants to take his land and sell it getting his money. He knows that if he adds his wife she may stop him, so this man you find that he hides and sells without the wife’s knowledge. But for me and my husband, we knew about it the both of us.
Maybe if he wants to bring another woman tomorrow and if there is title me I first pull strings with him before she can take my land.
I had not seen any one who had got it before, if they are not my friends and they tell me, I can’t know.
No, I haven’t.
I knew about them although I wasn’t able as a person.
It depends on the income you have.
You find that you have little money, some the children take it to school and the rest you use it to take care of the family so you are not able to get what to go and use to look a for a title.
You can see someone’s land and they don’t have stones and the only thing you can know is that they are not in title.
They would love the titles, but the problem we have little income. We don’t have money in this village.
But me I have less, but everyone thinks their own way. Those with 20 cows and more are the rich ones. Me who has few I don’t have much.

You can get many by the way.
Intra-household discussion and bargaining
We are going to talk about the conversations you had with your husbands about titles. You told they visited you for how many times?
It has taken a long time; do I still remember but I think it is not below 3 times.
Yes,
We asked ourselves what these people main aim was maybe they wanted to give us help but later they told us they wanted to gives a title and we accepted. We decided to keep waiting for whoever would come and that we would welcome them.
Actually in the first times we thought they were coming from NAADs (National Agricultural Advisory Services) because they came and toured where our gardens were and even at the other land I had rented they would come.
Us we agreed there and then, we had no issues. In our conversation, we were wondering whether they will ask us for money, and what if we fail to get it even for the surveyors because they brought surveyors but they didn’t ask for money.
Yes, I didn’t know if they were from the sub county or where.
The time has been long; you can forget these things.
It is now a year and some months.
We talked on how we would keep it. We said if we keep it in the house and someone comes,

and takes it away then who will have the land? So we decided to take it to the bank, he had opened an account and am not on that account in Able Sacco in Bwizibwera.
No, he is alone there.
No, he is the one there and we took there some small money so that our title stays there in an active account. Like I told you the seasons have been hard, you plant but they didn’t yield much or you rent land and you don’t get much harvest so the little money we get, we take the children to school.
No, they are just keeping for us the title.
Yes.
I see that everything is still the same nothing has changed.
We all are farmers.
As I go to dig in the garden, he stays weeding in the banana plantation, after I finish I come here and I help him in our banana plantation.
I see that there has been no issue at all. Like people who have stayed together, we disagree but after we get fine.
They can fail to end and you find the home has broken apart and everyone goes their own way.
You prevent them by accepting whatever comes at you. You find that some people have quarrels and the woman says that she has gone but I have never decided to do this personally.

We wake up and quarrel and after we get back to our peace. You forgive and it also ends.
Even now you have found me here.
He supports me surely. He lets me grow my goats and has never tried to take them away from me, this is big support because many women are taken off their things and on top of that they are beaten. Also when I get my money as a woman, he doesn’t take it away from me we are still discussing together, if I want to give it to him id o and if I don’t want I tell him I don’t have it.
We both do it together. Now like this project of goats, it is mine alone as a woman, when is ell a goat he may ask me if we can use that money to pay for a child’s school fees and being that the child is mine, I van give it to him.
Beans are my garden of income as a woman. I also have my needs.
Yes, but if I have the money and he says we don’t have money, they can’t send a child back home and I keep that money, I give to him to pay the school fess and if he also has it he can also go and pay or if I have a need and I ask him for 20,000 or 30,000 or even 50,000 depending on how I want it, he gives to me with ease.
I help him this way, I am a woman and I dig in the gardens so the banana plantation should have been his work too, but I also come and weed it.
This is our nature and that how we started our marriage.
Yes, it is not like he gives me the plantation so that I plant in beans and I have to look for the sauce to feed the children. Though the plantation would have been his, we work together as one.
I look after him, I cook for him and he eats and I wash his clothes.

But you may not know what happens out there for others.
I think that they also do the same, seeing that I have friends that are older than me and they are still in their homes, I think they also do the same.
For example, in this village we don’t have money, now how will a man support the wife by buying her a good cloth yet he doesn’t have the money.
It depends on how they carry their family. If they are people who quarrel and fight everyday but if you agree then you help each other.
When you don’t have the same income, you find that a wife wants something maybe she wants money or wants to go to her home like how I am coming from mine and when the man tells her that he doesn’t have money, the fight starts from there.
You find everyone has their own pocket and this brings the misunderstandings.
The woman gets money and she hides it, and the man also gets it and hides it and this doesn’t bring about peace in a home. Everyone starts asking their fellow about that they have been earning this causes them to even fight.
We agree to do one thing, I ask him whether I should put beans in the plantation and if he refuses I don’t put them there.
Not on whether he should weed the plantation or sell a bunch of bananas.
I don’t want to lie to you, I haven’t seen them. He can’t sell bananas that I don’t know about.

Whether they are 8 bunches or 10 we sell them together and then decide what do.
This is when we get money from bananas but it is not enough so we decide to use to pay the children’s school fees. You can’t see a child home and you start saying that you want a good sweater, no.
Like I told you I haven’t even been around, I left when the children were going back to school and he paid for them the school fees as I also left.
I hope they also sit and discus and see how to take care of their home because if there is no discussion and agreement the family can’t be one.
I said it is a good thing, because you can’t have your neighbor that you boarder and you find him entering in your land and you can’t enter his side to disturb him therefore, it is a good thing.
Gender norms around land
In this part, we have known land to be associated with men more than the women. So we would love to understand land and women and what you think about this personally. Are their women who own land in this village?
For her to own the land, you find that her husband died. Like how I told you that if I am not around he takes care of it and if he is not around I take care of it.
Yes, you find her taking care of it.
No, if the husband is the one left then he owns it, if she is the one left then she owns it.
Yes, they do have it a part form those who have lost their husbands.

If I have my money as a woman, I can decide to buy a piece of land on the side that doesn’t have a relation to this one and I also know that I have got this land it is mine and I have control over it.
We use it with my family whether we deiced to use it for grazing or a banana plantation where we get from bananas for eating it all helps us.
If I have it as a person I also know that it is my own land therefore I use it as I like. I wouldn’t sell it but I would plant a banana plantation in there.
R; I can, but like it told you I am renting land now. You know we women love to cultivate so I would say let me bring a mango seed and put it here but we can’t agree on this when he won’t allow me to. If the land is mine alone then I can use it in my own way that I like.
Me I have a chance that I agree with my husband, we sell our bananas and decide what we will do whether pay for the children school fees or do other things. There is someone who doesn’t have this chance, you find that she can’t even sell a banana or cultivate their land yet the man is renting out this land to other people. If she has her land as a woman then she can use it for all these things.
In good terms you should be having it with your husband and therefore it is for the family but also the woman having it on the side helps her with the needs I had told you about.
Have with their men but also have something on the side because like now we have more of farm land than land to cultivate on, so if I have my land as a wife I would be growing my crops and be happy in that.
Both of us decide and agree together. When he sells bananas, he can bring the money and we decide what we shall use it for.
We will agree together because he has to first tell me.

When it is family land it is family land and the man has more control over it. I can’t say I will remove the farm fence from there and make it a garden, if he tells me not to dig there then I leave it. But if he says he is going to sell this part up to there, here we must first agree I can’t allow him to just sell.
Yes, but there are some who will sell it, but if I find that he has sold it I will go to report to the LC1 chairperson asking him how he signed a selling agreement where I am not, wherever he sends me whether to the sub county level, I will go there.
I haven’t seen it yet
Yes, it is now her land with her family
This depends on the man’s decisions. If he said that after he is gone no one should disturb the wife because it is her land, then it shall be.
This now depends on the family where she got married into. There are some bad families who can chase her away.
It is for the children
The relatives on the father’s side like their uncles or aunties or a family friend can take care of them and when they are grown they give the children their land.
You just have hope that they will take care of the children. These days most times both man and woman die because of the diseases that affect us so my sister or brother can take care of the child I don’t think they can leave the child behind. Tomorrow, they can give the child the land that belonged to the father.
There is always someone who will be gracious to them and take care of them until they grow up.

Now like I told you about my father having two wives, had my mother died before giving birth then the land can remain to the other woman who has children. If you don’t give birth, he may find a woman who gives birth and tomorrow that land will be for that woman who has children and if she is not there, then any of the children who have been taking care of the remaining parent can take the land or it stays on the man’s side.
I don’t think there is a difference because all the same if you have children, when they grow up as a parent who is remaining you have to give them their share of land.
Yes, for him where he got me wasn’t there land? For the years we have made for example, even though it was his share from the father, if he tells me to go where does he want me to go. I am his wife all the same.
They do get married but now me I think about the child that she is going to give birth to from the other man, will she give that child a share on this land of these children whom their father passed on or she will take the child to the father’s place.
Yes, in good faith. Just that these days’ widows are making decision on their own she can say she wants to bring her husband here but she shouldn’t be bringing him there.
These days’ widows make these decisions and tell the family that there is nothing they can do to them. They say everyone has their own family to take care of rather than coming into hers. The truth is that bringing the man here is not good.
Our hearts are not the same, you will find one who will say that I want to get married again while another decides to stay and look after her children.
They stayed with their children.

I haven’t heard about it or seen it here.
I haven’t heard about it. If she has given birth and wants to grow her children how can a family member come to chase her away or take the land.
I haven’t seen any change; I see them in their homes with their children. I haven’t seen any one having trouble as widow.
Yes
I haven’t seen them suffering in any way at all. I see them in their homes moving on well. I see their children going to school, so she is working well.
If they are your friend, you go and visit them because not everyone in the village is your friend and you can’t just go visiting everyone. You go and converse with her like that but there is nothing much more.
In good faith she should stay on the land depending on the time they have spent together but us as women we have hard hearts, you leave and go do your own things out there.
I leave them behind, where would I be taking them yet here they have a banana plantation to get from food and they have house where they can sleep. I can’t take them elsewhere.
I leave them with him still, if I am gracious as a parent, I can only take the one who is breast feeding but if you don’t care, you leave the child behind and the father knows how he will grow them.
I think women can persevere in this case but just that some have hard hearts they go away and decide to do their own things or work their own money.

No, I haven’t
Yes, they do if she come back after a while. But if she goes and says she will never come back then there is no share for her the children will get their shares tomorrow.
He will leave her there and go look for the other woman that he wants.
It doesn’t make me happy as a woman, I would want that they get a share of the land. If I have spent like 25 years that I told you and then I leave, he has to also give me some land for the time I have spent with him, we have to share.
This is when they work together and no one is disturbing the other wanting to sell here or there. They agree together.
They don’t want the woman to put her signature so that tomorrow when they want to sell the land and do their own thing the woman doesn’t stop him.
Misunderstandings in a home end when you forgive each other and forget. The land may not remove these.
It is possible that we have land together, I plant crops and he does too but none of us shows the other how much we have got from the selling of the crops. This may lead to a misunderstanding whereby we all tell each other to buy for the children this because we don’t have the money. Land may not increase or end whatever misunderstandings we have as a home, it depends on our hearts and the only way is to forgive each other and start working together.
If you realize that you are not one in whatever you are doing then it is time to sit and start agreeing together as a family.

Land disputes
To me it is finding that the husband wants to sell there, the wife says you will not sell it and they start fighting yet when you agree together, there will be no fight because you know well whatever you are going to do.
You find that your neighbor wants to cut off some part of your land or you want to part their part of land leading to wrangles.
I haven’t been able to see it or hear about it in this village.
If they are all able as people, they would get a title and mark their land with stones.
It is them agreeing with each other because even if you call people in the village to come and we have not agreed there is nothing that can be done.
When we are fighting we can call our neighbors and they advise who is in wrong maybe they can tell the man not to sell or tell the woman to allow him to sell and we agree or we don’t.
We go to the chairman LC1 and he will tell me where to go after him.
If they are neighbors, the fight can end because the title shows where each of them ends so no one can go to cut their neighbor’s land
I would love them to get the help like we got and they get a title with stones to mark their land.

People need to agree with each where everyone’s boundaries are in case of a dispute. We call the chairman, some committee members and the other neighbors that are near us and we mark where everyone’s land passes.
I know you are coming from an organization and because I didn’t go to school I tend to forget its name.
We were helped to get the title; can’t you help our other neighbors too?
That was it.
God bless you.






